In the previous lecture, we looked at the
tooltip velocity for a two-joint robot. The
end-effector pose is described by the end-effector
coordinates x and y, and we came up with expressions
for the rate of change of the end-effector
pose. That is the rate of change of x and
the rate of change of y in terms of the rate
of change of the robot joint angles. We did
a similar thing for the three-joint robot
where the end-effector pose is described by
a coordinate x and y, and an orientation angle,
theta. And, we again described x-dot, y-dot
and theta-dot in terms of the rate of change
of the robot’s joint angles.
Now, we want to do the same thing for a six-axis
robot like this Puma 560 robot. We found out
that it is very, very difficult to do. The
necessary differential calculus and algebra
is going to take up pages and pages and pages
in my notebook. It is a very difficult thing
to do. So, we are going to look at an alternative
way to crack this problem.
So, what we want do now is to understand the
relationship between the velocity of the joints
of this multi-jointed robot and the velocity
of the end-effector, which we described in
terms of its rate of change of its x, y and
z coordinates and rate of change of its orientation.
If we look at just a single joint, which
is the approach we are going to use here,
we can see that as I adjust just the first
joint of the robot, we can see that the end-effector
moves in an arc. And so, as I adjust joint
one by a small amount, we see that the x and
y coordinates of the end-effector change.
Now, if I adjust the second joint by a small
amount, we can see that the end-effector changes
in the vertical or z direction and its orientation
also changes slightly. We can follow exactly
the same argument for the third joint of the
robot, fourth joint of the robot and so on.
In your first calculus class, you would have
come across this relationship. We can approximate
the derivative of a function by taking a finite
difference. In this case, we perturb the value
of x by a small amount, delta x. And, as delta
x gets smaller and smaller in the limit as
it approaches zero, we have the true derivative.
What we are going to do is to compute an approximate
derivative of the forward kinematic function.
Now, we have introduced previously the forward
kinematics as a function K and function of
the joint angles and it returns the end-effector
pose. And, you will notice here that I have
used the partial derivative notation because
the kinematic function is a function of a
vector Q. And, we are going to consider the
partial derivative with respect to one particular
joint angle. So, what we are trying to do
is to come up with an approximation for the
way in which the forward kinematics changes
as a function of variation of a single joint
angle.
For the six-axis robot, we are going to treat
the joints individually and we are going to
start with joint number one. So, the first
thing that we are interested in is, if I adjust
joint number one, what effect does that have
on the translational and angular velocity
of the end-effector? In the animation on the
right hand side, we can see the end-effector
pose changing as we make small adjustments
to the first joint angle. That is Q1.
Let us look at how this works for the Puma
560 robot. The first thing I am going to do
is to load a model of the Puma 560 robot and
we need to decide what joint angle configuration
the robot is going to be in. You will notice
in the workspace that there are a number of
variables like Qn, Qr, Qs and Qz and these
are just different robot poses.
The one we are going to use is Qn. That is
short hand for Q nominal. This is a pose of
the Puma robot that is somewhat in the middle
of its workspace and where it is very dexterous.
It is able to move nicely in many different
directions.
Now, we are going to do is to compute the
forward kinematics at that particular pose
and we use the fkine method to do that. And,
here is the end-effector pose expressed as
a homogeneous transformation matrix. Now,
what I am going to do is to compute the end-effector
pose when I slightly disturb the joint angles.
So, it is going to be about the pose Qn. What
I am going to do is to add a vector to that
and the first element in the vector is a small
displacement.
Now, I am going to displace joint one. So,
I am going to add zero to the rest of the
robot’s joints. What we have now is the
end-effector pose for a very small change
in the angle of joint number one. We have
disturbed joint one by 0.01 radians. And
here, we can see that the end-effector pose
is slightly different.
If we summarised the results that we have
just obtained in MATLAB for the nominal joint
angle given here by the vector Q, this is
the robot’s end-effector pose expressed
as a 4 x 4 homogenous transformation matrix.
We adjusted Q by a very small amount. We adjusted
it by 0.01 radians, which is around half
a degree. When we did that, we obtained a
slightly different value for the robot’s
end-effector pose. We can see that the numbers
in those two matrices are not exactly the
same and that is, of course, what we expect
because we have changed one of the joint angles.
The challenge now is to understand how this
change is related to the change in the joint
angle.
We are now going to use the expression we
introduced a moment ago which relates the
derivative of a function to a finite difference
in a function. If I compute that finite difference,
I get this matrix result here. And the question
is, of course, what does this actually mean?
If I write the symbolic expression for a homogeneous
transformation matrix, which we recall has
got a 3 x 3 rotational component and a 3 x
1 translational component, and if I take the
derivative of that matrix with respect to
the joint variable Q1, I can write this expression
here.
Now, we can match the components in this symbolic
expression with the components in the numeric
expression. So, this is the expression - a
partial derivative of T with respect to Q1
and this bit here is the partial derivative
of the rotation matrix with respect to Q1.
Let us consider first the translational part.
Here is the partial derivative of the robot’s
end-effector position with respect to Q1.
And, if I multiply that by the rate of change
of Q1 with respect to time, I end up with
the rate of change of translation with respect
to time, which is in fact is the end-effector’s
translational velocity. That is x-dot, y-dot
and z-dot which I might also write sometimes
as Vx, Vy or Vz. I can rearrange this expression
and we have an expression for the end-effector
velocity in terms of a constant vector multiplied
by the velocity of joint one.
You notice that there is an approximation
sign in here. It is important to remember
that we have computed a finite difference
here. It is an approximation to the true derivative.
We used a change in joint angle of 0.01 radians.
And, as we make that change in joint angle
smaller and smaller, we will get a better
approximation to the true derivative. But,
if we make it too small, we will encounter
numerical errors because of the way arithmetic
is done inside a digital computer and we need
to find some sort of balance. So, keep in
mind that what we have done here is an approximation
to the true relationship.
We have related end-effector translational
velocity to rate of change of Q1 and we can
do this for joint two and for joint three
all the way up to joint six. Find the expressions
that relate joint velocity to end-effector
translational velocity.
Let us now consider the rotational part. And,
this is not quite as straightforward. Here,
I have written the partial derivative of a
rotation matrix with respect to joint angle
one. And, if I multiply that by the rate of
change of joint one with respect to time,
I end up with the rate of change of the rotation
matrix with respect to time. There is a well-known
relationship between the rate of change of
the rotation matrix, the angular velocity
omega and the rotation matrix itself. And,
we can substitute that in here. The matrix
S is what we called a skew symmetric matrix
and it is a function of the angular velocity
vector omega.